# Matrix multiplication on RePair compressed matrices

## Installation 

Clone/download then `make`. There are no external dependencies.


## Sample computation

Given the `covtype` matrix in csv format (581012 rows, 54 columns) we compress it with the command:
```
matrepair covtype 581012 54
```
that creates the three files `covtype.val`, `covtype.vc.R` and `covtype.vc.C` representing the original matrix. 

Next, we create a vector containig 54 entries equal to 1.0 and store it to the file `x54.dbl`:
```
makevec.py x54.dbl 54 1
```
Now we can compute the matrix vector products $`y=Mx`$ and $`z^T = y^T M`$ with the command:
```
remm covtype 581012 54 x54.dbl -y y.dbl -z z.dbl
```
The output vector `y.dbl` has length 581012 and contains the sum of the entries of each row:
```
od -An -t f8 y.dbl | head
                    10300                    10077
                    13195                    13219
                     9963                     9709
                    10409                    10298
                    10456                    10378
                    10629                    13361
                    12989                    10640
                     9626                     9513
                    10310                     9479
                     9475                     9531
```
The output vector `z.dbl` has length 54 and contains the sum of the entries of each column of $`A^T A`$:
```
od -An -t f8 z.dbl | head
           14549643830975             757939056719
              65655800755            1372019643035
             227139887795           13332507438427
            1032604199658            1089965982517
             697072520994           11059033547178
               2526285260                225296661
               1924930316                178077606
                 12992451                 43226269
                 24825698                 78839086
                  7002929                 33807845
```


## Tools

### matrepair
Tool to compute a grammar compressed matrix multiplication friendly versions of a matrix given in `.csv` format. Calls the tools `mat2vc` and `irepair0` (below). With option `-r`, shows a nice report detailing running times and compression ratio. See below for the different output formats which are generated in a sigle call to `matrepair`.


### mat2vc.py
Tool to preprocess a matrix in `.csv` format; creates a `.vc` and `.val` files containing a value-column representation of the matrix nonzero elements. Each nonzero element *a = A[i][j]* is represented by an integer encoding a pair *(id,j)* where *j* is the column index and *id* is the index of the position in the `.val` file containing the actual value *a*. Since for dense matrices the `.csv` format is wasteful,  if the input file ends with `.double` then it is assumed to be in binary format with 8 bytes for each entry stored as a double


### brepair/irepair0
Tool using the RePair algorithm to grammar-compress a sequence of integers; the integer 0 is never compressed (used in the rhs of a rule). In matrepair is is used to compress the `.vc` file producing the `.vc.R` (rules) and `.vc.C` (sequence) files.


### makevec.py
Tool to create a vector and write it to a file in binary format (default 8-byte doubles). The vector is specified giving a set of values which are repeated cyclically.

 
### remm
Tool to compute a series of left and right matrix-vector multiplications. Takes as input a repair compressed matrix in Re32 format (files `.val`, `.vc.R`, `.vc.C`) of size *RxC*, a vector *x* of size *C* stored in a binary file (possibly generated by `makevec.py`) and an integer parameter *n* and computes *n* times the operation *y=Mx*, *z=y^t M*, *x = z/|z|*.

### csrmm
Analogous to *remm* (uses the same code) except that the input matrix is in Compressed Sparse Row (CSR) format (files `.val` and `.vc` see below) 

### ansremm, ivremm, ansivremm
Analogous to *remm* except that the input matrix is expected to be in the format ReANS, ReIV, and  ReANSIV (see below)


## Available Matrix Compression Formats

### CSR
Compressed Sparse Row format. File extensions `.val` and `.vc`

### Re32
The `.vc` file of the CSR format is grammar compressed with RePair. All symbols are represented by 31 bit unsigned integers. File extensions `.val`, `.vc.R`, and `vc.C`


### ReANS
The `.vc.C` file of the remm32 format is compressed using the ANS-fold-1 algorithm. 
File extensions `.val`, `.vc.R`, and `vc.C.ansf.1`


### ReIV
The `.vc.C` and `vc.R` files of the remm32 format are represented as packed array with the minimum number of bits per entry using the `int_vector` class from SDSL-lite.
File extensions `.val`, `.vc.R.iv`, and `vc.C.iv`


### ReANSIV
The `.vc.C` file of the remm32 format is compressed using the ANS-fold-1 algorithm. The `.vc.R` file is represented as a packed array.
File extensions `.val`, `.vc.R.iv`, and `vc.C.ansf.1`


## Debugging/Work in progress

### recg
Tool to compute iterations of the Conjugate Gradient method. Takes as input with a repair compressed matrix (files `.val`, `.vc.R`, `.vc.C`) of size *RxC*, a vector *y* of size *R* stored in a binary file and an integer parameter *n* and computes *n* iterations of the CG algorithm to solve the minimization problem: *min_x | Mx - y|*.

### mat2bin.py
Tool to convert a matrix in csv format into binary float or double format. All entries are represented so the outfile has size `rows*cols*sizeof(double/float)`. With the option `--strip` the tool simply strips trailing or leading columns, or leading rows maintinaing the csv format. Used only for debugging or data preparation.


### fillMissing.py
Tool to replace in a csv file all missing and NA entries with a given string. Used only for debugging or data preparation.

### count.py
Tool to count the number of occurrences of an integer values in binary file containing n-bytes integers, with n=1,...,8. Used only for debugging.


